Hands-On
Large Language Models
linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media
youtube.com/oreillymedia
AI has acquired startling new language capabilities in just
the past few years. Driven by rapid advances in deep learning,
language AI systems are able to write and understand text
better than ever before. This trend is enabling new features,
products, and entire industries. Through this book’s visually
educational nature, readers will learn practical tools and
concepts they need to use these capabilities today.
You’ll understand how to use pretrained large language
models for use cases like copywriting and summarization;
create semantic search systems that go beyond keyword
matching; and use existing libraries and pretrained models
for text classification, search, and clusterings.
This book also helps you:
• Understand the architecture of Transformer language
models that excel at text generation and representation
• Build advanced LLM pipelines to cluster text documents
and explore the topics they cover
• Build semantic search engines that go beyond keyword
search, using methods like dense retrieval and rerankers
• Explore how generative models can be used, from prompt
engineering all the way to retrieval-augmented generation
• Gain a deeper understanding of how to train LLMs
and optimize them for specific applications using
generative model fine-tuning, contrastive fine-tuning,
and in-context learning
Jay Alammar is director and
engineering fellow at Cohere.
Maarten Grootendorst is
senior clinical data scientist at
the Netherlands Comprehensive
Cancer Organization (IKNL).
US $79.99 CAN $99.99
ISBN: 978-1-098-15096-9
Praise for Hands-On Large Language Models
This is an exceptional guide to the world of language models and their practical
applications in industry. Its highly-visual coverage of generative, representational, and
retrieval applications of language models empowers readers to quickly understand, use,
and refine LLMs. Highly recommended!
—Nils Reimers, Director of Machine Learning
at Cohere | creator of sentence-transformers
Jay and Maarten have continued their tradition of providing beautifully illustrated and
insightful descriptions of complex topics in their new book. Bolstered with working code,
timelines, and references to key papers, their book is a valuable resource for anyone
looking to understand the main techniques behind how Large Language Models are built.
—Andrew Ng, founder of DeepLearning.AI
I can’t think of another book that is more important to read right now. On every single
page, I learned something that is critical to success in this era of language models.
—Josh Starmer, StatQuest
If you’re looking to get up to speed in everything regarding LLMs, look no further! In
this wonderful book, Jay and Maarten will take you from zero to expert in the history
and latest advances in large language models. With very intuitive explanations, great
real-life examples, clear illustrations, and comprehensive code labs, this book lifts the
curtain on the complexities of transformer models, tokenizers, semantic search, RAG,
and many other cutting-edge technologies. A must read for anyone interested in the
latest AI technology!
—Luis Serrano, PhD, Founder and CEO of Serrano Academy
This book is a must-read for anyone interested in the rapidly-evolving field of
generative AI. With a focus on both text and visual embeddings, it’s a great blend
of algorithmic evolution, theoretical rigor, and practical guidance. Whether you are a
student, researcher, or industry professional, this book will equip you with the use cases
and solutions needed to level-up your knowledge of generative AI. Well done!
—Chris Fregly, Principal Solution Architect,
Generative AI at AWS
In the heart of the GenAI revolution, this indispensable guide masterfully balances theory
and practice, navigating the vast landscape of large language models to equip readers with
the knowledge needed for immediate and transformative impact in the field of AI.
—Tarun Narayanan Venkatachalam, AI Researcher,
University of Washington
Timely reading to get hands-on experience with language models.
—Emir Muñoz, Genesys
Hands-On Large Language Models brings clarity and practical examples to cut through
the hype of AI. It provides a wealth of great diagrams and visual aids to supplement
the clear explanations. The worked examples and code make concrete what other books
leave abstract. The book starts with simple introductory beginnings, and steadily builds in
scope. By the final chapters, you will be fine-tuning and building your own large language
models with confidence.
—Leland McInnes, Researcher at the Tutte Institute for
Mathematics and Computing
Finally, a book that not only avoids superficial coverage of large language models but
also thoroughly explores the background in a way that is both accessible and engaging.
The authors have masterfully created a definitive guide that will remain essential reading
despite the fast-paced advancements in the field.
—Prof. DDr. Roman Egger, CEO of Smartvisions.at
and Modul University Vienna
Jay Alammar and Maarten Grootendorst
Hands-On Large Language Models
Language Understanding and Generation
Beijing Boston Farnham Sebastopol Tokyo
978-1-098-15096-9
[LSI]
Hands-On Large Language Models
by Jay Alammar and Maarten Grootendorst
Copyright © 2024 Jay Alammar and Maarten Pieter Grootendorst. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are
also available for most titles (http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional
sales department: 800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Acquisitions Editor: Nicole Butterfield
Development Editor: Michele Cronin
Production Editor: Ashley Stussy
Copyeditor: Charles Roumeliotis
Proofreader: Kim Cofer
Indexer: BIM Creatives, LLC
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Kate Dullea
September 2024: First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2024-09-10: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781098150969 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Hands-On Large Language Models, the
cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
The views expressed in this work are those of the authors and do not represent the publisher’s views.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the information and
instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and the authors disclaim all responsibility
for errors or omissions, including without limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use
of or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your
own risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to open
source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that your use
thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.
Table of Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Part I. Understanding Language Models
1. An Introduction to Large Language Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
What Is Language AI? 4
A Recent History of Language AI 5
Representing Language as a Bag-of-Words 6
Better Representations with Dense Vector Embeddings 8
Types of Embeddings 10
Encoding and Decoding Context with Attention 11
Attention Is All You Need 15
Representation Models: Encoder-Only Models 18
Generative Models: Decoder-Only Models 20
The Year of Generative AI 23
The Moving Definition of a “Large Language Model” 25
The Training Paradigm of Large Language Models 25
Large Language Model Applications: What Makes Them So Useful? 27
Responsible LLM Development and Usage 28
Limited Resources Are All You Need 28
Interfacing with Large Language Models 29
Proprietary, Private Models 29
Open Models 30
Open Source Frameworks 31
Generating Your First Text 32
Summary 34
v
2. Tokens and Embeddings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
LLM Tokenization 38
How Tokenizers Prepare the Inputs to the Language Model 38
Downloading and Running an LLM 39
How Does the Tokenizer Break Down Text? 43
Word Versus Subword Versus Character Versus Byte Tokens 44
Comparing Trained LLM Tokenizers 46
Tokenizer Properties 55
Token Embeddings 57
A Language Model Holds Embeddings for the Vocabulary of Its Tokenizer 57
Creating Contextualized Word Embeddings with Language Models 58
Text Embeddings (for Sentences and Whole Documents) 61
Word Embeddings Beyond LLMs 63
Using pretrained Word Embeddings 63
The Word2vec Algorithm and Contrastive Training 64
Embeddings for Recommendation Systems 67
Recommending Songs by Embeddings 67
Training a Song Embedding Model 69
Summary 71
3. Looking Inside Large Language Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
An Overview of Transformer Models 74
The Inputs and Outputs of a Trained Transformer LLM 74
The Components of the Forward Pass 76
Choosing a Single Token from the Probability Distribution (Sampling/
Decoding) 79
Parallel Token Processing and Context Size 81
Speeding Up Generation by Caching Keys and Values 83
Inside the Transformer Block 85
Recent Improvements to the Transformer Architecture 95
More Efficient Attention 96
The Transformer Block 101
Positional Embeddings (RoPE) 102
Other Architectural Experiments and Improvements 105
Summary 106
Part II. Using Pretrained Language Models
4. Text Classification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
The Sentiment of Movie Reviews 112
Text Classification with Representation Models 113
vi | Table of Contents
Model Selection 115
Using a Task-Specific Model 116
Classification Tasks That Leverage Embeddings 120
Supervised Classification 121
What If We Do Not Have Labeled Data? 123
Text Classification with Generative Models 127
Using the Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer 128
ChatGPT for Classification 132
Summary 135
5. Text Clustering and Topic Modeling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
ArXiv’s Articles: Computation and Language 138
A Common Pipeline for Text Clustering 139
Embedding Documents 139
Reducing the Dimensionality of Embeddings 140
Cluster the Reduced Embeddings 142
Inspecting the Clusters 144
From Text Clustering to Topic Modeling 146
BERTopic: A Modular Topic Modeling Framework 148
Adding a Special Lego Block 156
The Text Generation Lego Block 160
Summary 164
6. Prompt Engineering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Using Text Generation Models 167
Choosing a Text Generation Model 167
Loading a Text Generation Model 168
Controlling Model Output 170
Intro to Prompt Engineering 173
The Basic Ingredients of a Prompt 173
Instruction-Based Prompting 175
Advanced Prompt Engineering 177
The Potential Complexity of a Prompt 177
In-Context Learning: Providing Examples 180
Chain Prompting: Breaking up the Problem 182
Reasoning with Generative Models 184
Chain-of-Thought: Think Before Answering 185
Self-Consistency: Sampling Outputs 188
Tree-of-Thought: Exploring Intermediate Steps 189
Output Verification 191
Providing Examples 192
Grammar: Constrained Sampling 194
Table of Contents | vii
Summary 198
7. Advanced Text Generation Techniques and Tools. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199
Model I/O: Loading Quantized Models with LangChain 200
Chains: Extending the Capabilities of LLMs 202
A Single Link in the Chain: Prompt Template 203
A Chain with Multiple Prompts 206
Memory: Helping LLMs to Remember Conversations 209
Conversation Buffer 210
Windowed Conversation Buffer 212
Conversation Summary 214
Agents: Creating a System of LLMs 218
The Driving Power Behind Agents: Step-by-step Reasoning 219
ReAct in LangChain 221
Summary 224
8. Semantic Search and Retrieval-Augmented Generation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225
Overview of Semantic Search and RAG 226
Semantic Search with Language Models 228
Dense Retrieval 228
Reranking 240
Retrieval Evaluation Metrics 244
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) 249
From Search to RAG 250
Example: Grounded Generation with an LLM API 252
Example: RAG with Local Models 252
Advanced RAG Techniques 255
RAG Evaluation 257
Summary 258
9. Multimodal Large Language Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
Transformers for Vision 260
Multimodal Embedding Models 263
CLIP: Connecting Text and Images 265
How Can CLIP Generate Multimodal Embeddings? 265
OpenCLIP 268
Making Text Generation Models Multimodal 273
BLIP-2: Bridging the Modality Gap 273
Preprocessing Multimodal Inputs 278
Use Case 1: Image Captioning 280
Use Case 2: Multimodal Chat-Based Prompting 283
Summary 286
viii | Table of Contents
Part III. Training and Fine-Tuning Language Models
10. Creating Text Embedding Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
Embedding Models 289
What Is Contrastive Learning? 291
SBERT 293
Creating an Embedding Model 296
Generating Contrastive Examples 296
Train Model 297
In-Depth Evaluation 300
Loss Functions 301
Fine-Tuning an Embedding Model 309
Supervised 309
Augmented SBERT 311
Unsupervised Learning 316
Transformer-Based Sequential Denoising Auto-Encoder 316
Using TSDAE for Domain Adaptation 320
Summary 321
11. Fine-Tuning Representation Models for Classification. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
Supervised Classification 323
Fine-Tuning a Pretrained BERT Model 325
Freezing Layers 328
Few-Shot Classification 333
SetFit: Efficient Fine-Tuning with Few Training Examples 333
Fine-Tuning for Few-Shot Classification 337
Continued Pretraining with Masked Language Modeling 340
Named-Entity Recognition 345
Preparing Data for Named-Entity Recognition 347
Fine-Tuning for Named-Entity Recognition 352
Summary 353
12. Fine-Tuning Generation Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355
The Three LLM Training Steps: Pretraining, Supervised Fine-Tuning, and
Preference Tuning 355
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) 357
Full Fine-Tuning 357
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) 359
Instruction Tuning with QLoRA 367
Templating Instruction Data 367
Model Quantization 369
LoRA Configuration 370
Table of Contents | ix
Training Configuration 371
Training 372
Merge Weights 373
Evaluating Generative Models 373
Word-Level Metrics 374
Benchmarks 374
Leaderboards 376
Automated Evaluation 376
Human Evaluation 376
Preference-Tuning / Alignment / RLHF 378
Automating Preference Evaluation Using Reward Models 379
The Inputs and Outputs of a Reward Model 380
Training a Reward Model 380
Training No Reward Model 384
Preference Tuning with DPO 385
Templating Alignment Data 386
Model Quantization 386
Training Configuration 387
Training 388
Summary 389
Afterword. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 391
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393
x | Table of Contents
Preface
Large language models (LLMs) have had a profound and far-reaching impact on the
world. By enabling machines to better understand and generate human-like language,
LLMs have opened new possibilities in the field of AI and impacted entire industries.
This book provides a comprehensive and highly visual introduction to the world of
LLMs, covering both the conceptual foundations and practical applications. From
word representations that preceded deep learning to the cutting-edge (at the time
of this writing) Transformer architecture, we will explore the history and evolution
of LLMs. We delve into the inner workings of LLMs, exploring their architectures,
training methods, and fine-tuning techniques. We also examine various applications
of LLMs in text classification, clustering, topic modeling, chatbots, search engines,
and more.
With its unique blend of intuition-building, applications, and illustrative style, we
hope that this book provides the ideal foundation for those looking to explore the
exciting world of LLMs. Whether you are a beginner or an expert, we invite you to
join us on this journey to start building with LLMs.
An Intuition-First Philosophy
The main goal of this book is to provide an intuition into the field of LLMs. The pace
of development in the Language AI field is incredibly fast and frustration can build
trying to keep up with the latest technologies. Instead, we focus on the fundamentals
of LLMs and intend to provide a fun and easy learning process.
To achieve this intuition-first philosophy we liberally make use of visual language.
Illustrations will help give a visual identity to major concepts and processes involved
xi
1 J. Alammar. “Machine learning research communication via illustrated and interactive web articles.” Beyond
Static Papers: Rethinking How We Share Scientific Understanding in ML. ICLR 2021 Workshop (2021).
in the learning process of LLMs.1
 With our illustrative method of storytelling, we
want to take you on a journey to this exciting and potentially world-changing field.
Throughout the book, we make a clear distinction between representation and gener‐
ative language models. Representation models are LLMs that do not generate text but
are commonly used for task-specific use cases, like classification, whereas generation
models are LLMs that generate text, like GPT models. Although generative models
are typically the first thing that comes to mind when thinking about LLMs, there is
still much use for representation models. We are also loosely using the word “large”
in large language models and often elect to simply call them language models as size
descriptions are often rather arbitrary and not always indicative of capability.
Prerequisites
This book assumes that you have some experience programming in Python and are
familiar with the fundamentals of machine learning. The focus will be on building a
strong intuition rather than deriving mathematical equations. As such, illustrations
combined with hands-on examples will drive the examples and learning through this
book. This book assumes no prior knowledge of popular deep learning frameworks
such as PyTorch or TensorFlow nor any prior knowledge of generative modeling.
If you are not familiar with Python, a great place to start is Learn Python, where you
will find many tutorials on the basics of the language. To further ease the learning
process, we made all the code available on Google Colab, a platform where you can
run all of the code without the need to install anything locally.
Book Structure
The book is broadly divided into three parts. They are illustrated in Figure P-1 to give
you a full view of the book. Note that each chapter can be read independently, so feel
free to skim chapters you are already familiar with.
Part I: Understanding Language Models
In Part I of the book, we explore the inner workings of language models both small
and large. We start with an overview of the field and common techniques (see Chap‐
ter 1) before moving over to two central components of these models, tokenization
and embeddings (see Chapter 2). We finish this part of the book with an updated
and expanded version of Jay’s well-known Illustrated Transformer, which dives into
xii | Preface
the architecture of these models (see Chapter 3). Many terms and definitions will be
introduced that are used throughout the book.
Figure P-1. All parts and chapters of the book.
Part II: Using Pretrained Language Models
In Part II of the book, we explore how LLMs can be used through common use cases.
We use pretrained models and demonstrate their capabilities without the need to
fine-tune them.
You learn how to use language models for supervised classification (see Chapter 4),
text clustering and topic modeling (see Chapter 5), leveraging embedding models
for semantic search (see Chapter 6), generating text (see Chapters 7 and 8), and
extending the capabilities of text generation to the visual domain (see Chapter 9).
Preface | xiii
Learning these individual language model capabilities will equip you with the skill
set to problem-solve with LLMs and build more and more advanced systems and
pipelines.
Part III: Training and Fine-Tuning Language Models
In Part III of the book, we explore advanced concepts through training and finetuning all kinds of language models. We will explore how to create and fine-tune an
embedding model (see Chapter 10), review how to fine-tune BERT for classification
(see Chapter 11), and end the book with several methods for fine-tuning generation
models (see Chapter 12).
Hardware and Software Requirements
Running generative models is generally a compute-intensive task that requires a com‐
puter with a strong GPU. Since those are not available to every reader, all examples
in this book are made to run using an online platform, namely Google Colaboratory,
often shortened to “Google Colab.” At the time of writing, this platform allows you to
use an NVIDIA GPU (T4) for free to run your code. This GPU has 16 GB of VRAM
(which is the memory of your GPU), which is the minimum amount of VRAM we
expect for the examples throughout the book.
Not all chapters require a minimum of 16 GB VRAM as
some examples, like training and fine-tuning, are more computeintensive than others, such as prompt engineering. In the repos‐
itory, you will find the minimum GPU requirements for each
chapter.
All code, requirements, and additional tutorials are available in this book’s repository.
If you want to run the examples locally, we recommend access to an NVIDIA GPU
with a minimum of 16 GB of VRAM. For a local installation, for example with conda,
you can follow this setup to create your environment:
conda create -n thellmbook python=3.10
conda activate thellmbook
You can install all the necessary dependencies by forking or cloning the repository
and then running the following in your newly created Python 3.10 environment:
pip install -r requirements.txt
xiv | Preface
API Keys
We use both open source and proprietary models throughout the examples to
demonstrate the advantages and disadvantages of both. For the proprietary models,
using OpenAI and Cohere’s offering, you will need to create a free account:
OpenAI
Click “sign up” on the site to create a free account. This account allows you to
create an API key, which can be used to access GPT-3.5. Then, go to “API keys” to
create a secret key.
Cohere
Register a free account on the website. Then, go to “API keys” to create a secret
key.
Note that with both accounts, rate limits apply and that these free API keys only allow
for a limited number of calls per minute. Throughout all examples, we have taken
that into account and provided local alternatives if necessary.
For the open source models, you do not need to create an account with the exception
of the Llama 2 model in Chapter 2. To use that model, you will need a Hugging Face
account:
Hugging Face
Click “sign up” on the Hugging Face website to create a free account. Then, in
“Settings” go to “Access Tokens” to create a token that you can use to download
certain LLMs.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.
Constant width
Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program
elements such as variable or function names, databases, data types, environment
variables, statements, and keywords.
Constant width bold
Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.
Constant width italic
Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values deter‐
mined by context.
Preface | xv
This element signifies a tip or suggestion.
This element signifies a general note.
Using Code Examples
Supplemental material (code examples, exercises, etc.) is available for download at
https://github.com/HandsOnLLM/Hands-On-Large-Language-Models.
If you have a technical question or a problem using the code examples, please send
email to support@oreilly.com.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code is
offered with this book, you may use it in your programs and documentation. You
do not need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant
portion of the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code
from this book does not require permission. Selling or distributing examples from
O’Reilly books does require permission. Answering a question by citing this book
and quoting example code does not require permission. Incorporating a significant
amount of example code from this book into your product’s documentation does
require permission.
We appreciate, but generally do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Hands-On Large Lan‐
guage Models by Jay Alammar and Maarten Grootendorst (O’Reilly). Copyright 2024
Jay Alammar and Maarten Pieter Grootendorst, 978-1-098-15096-9.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission given
above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.
O’Reilly Online Learning
For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technol‐
ogy and business training, knowledge, and insight to help
companies succeed.
xvi | Preface
Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and expertise
through books, articles, and our online learning platform. O’Reilly’s online learning
platform gives you on-demand access to live training courses, in-depth learning
paths, interactive coding environments, and a vast collection of text and video from
O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more information, visit https://oreilly.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-889-8969 (in the United States or Canada)
707-827-7019 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
support@oreilly.com
https://www.oreilly.com/about/contact.html
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional
information. You can access this page at https://oreil.ly/hands_on_LLMs_1e.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit https://oreilly.com.
Find us on LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media.
Watch us on YouTube: https://youtube.com/oreillymedia.
Acknowledgments
Writing this book has been an incredible experience, collaboration, and journey
for us.
The field of (large) language models is one of the most dynamic areas in technology
today, and within the span of writing this book, we have witnessed extraordinary
advancements. Yet, despite the rapid pace of change, the fundamental principles
remain strikingly consistent which made the writing process particularly intriguing.
We are grateful to have had the opportunity to explore this field in-depth at such a
pivotal moment.
Working with our O’Reilly team was incredible! Special thanks to Michele Cronin for
her amazing feedback, support, and enthusiasm for this book from day one. We could
not have asked for a better editor—you are amazing! Thank you, Nicole Butterfield,
for kicking off this book and helping us maintain a structured approach throughout
the writing. Thank you to Karen Montgomery for creating our wonderful cover, we
Preface | xvii
love the kangaroo! Big thanks to Kate Dullea for being so patient with us having to go
through hundreds of illustrations many times over. The timely early releases by Clare
Laylock helped us see our work grow which was a big motivator, thank you. Thanks
to Ashley Stussy and Charles Roumeliotis for the development in the final stages of
the book and everyone else at O’Reilly who contributed.
Thanks to our amazing crew of technical reviewers. Invaluable feedback was given
by Harm Buisman, Emir Muñoz, Luba Elliott, Guarav Chawla, Rafael V. Pierre, Luba
Elliott, Tarun Narayanan, Nikhil Buduma, and Patrick Harrison.
Jay
I’d love to extend my deepest gratitude to my family for their unwavering support
and inspiration. I would like to specifically acknowledge my parents, Abdullah and
Mishael, and my aunts, Hussah and Aljoharah.
I’m grateful to the friends, colleagues, and collaborators who helped me understand
and explain the tricky concepts covered in this book as well as to the Cohere folks
who cultivate a supporting learning and sharing environment. Thank you to Adrien
Morisot, Aidan Gomez, Andy Toulis, Anfal Alatawi, Arash Ahmadian, Bharat Venki‐
tesh, Edward Grefenstette, Ivan Zhang, Joao Araújo, Luis Serrano, Matthias Gallé,
Meor Amer, Nick Frosst, Patrick Lewis, Phil Blunsom, Sara Hooker, and Suhas Pai.
I couldn’t conceive of this project getting accomplished to the level it has without
the extraordinary talent and tireless effort of Maarten, my coauthor. Your ability
to repeatedly nail the technical details (from the pinned version of the nth import
dependency to the latest in LLM quantization) while weaving some of the world’s best
visual narratives is absolutely breathtaking.
Lastly, a tip of the hat to the incredible coffee shop scene of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia for
supplying me with caffeine and a good place to focus from dawn until midnight. It’s
where I read most of these papers and worked out my understanding (looking at you,
Elixir Bunn).
Maarten
I want to begin by expressing my heartfelt appreciation to my coauthor, Jay. Your
insights have made this not only possible but incredibly fulfilling. This journey has
been nothing short of amazing and collaborating with you has been an absolute joy.
I want to sincerely thank my wonderful colleagues at IKNL for their continued
support throughout this journey. A special mention goes to Harm—our Monday
morning coffee breaks discussing this book were a constant source of encouragement.
Thank you to my family and friends for their unwavering support, and to my parents
in particular. Pap, despite the challenges you faced, you always found a way to be
xviii | Preface
there for me when I needed it most, thank you. Mam, the conversations we had
as aspiring writers were wonderful and motivated me more than you could ever
imagine. Thank you both for your endless support and encouragement.
Finally, I am at a loss for words to adequately express my gratitude to my wonderful
wife, Ilse. Lieverd, your boundless enthusiasm and patience have been legendary,
especially when I droned on about the latest LLM developments for hours on end.
You are my greatest support. My apologies to my amazing daughter, Sarah. At just
two years old, you already have listened to more about large language models than
anyone should have to endure in a lifetime! I promise we’ll make up for it with
endless playtime and adventures together.
Preface | xix
PART I
Understanding Language Models
CHAPTER 1
An Introduction to Large Language Models
Humanity is at an inflection point. From 2012 onwards, developments in building AI
systems (using deep neural networks) accelerated so that by the end of the decade,
they yielded the first software system able to write articles indiscernible from those
written by humans. This system was an AI model called Generative Pre-trained
Transformer 2, or GPT-2. 2022 marked the release of ChatGPT, which demonstrated
how profoundly this technology was poised to revolutionize how we interact with
technology and information. Reaching one million active users in five days and
then one hundred million active users in two months, the new breed of AI models
started out as human-like chatbots but quickly evolved into a monumental shift in
our approach to common tasks, like translation, text generation, summarization, and
more. It became an invaluable tool for programmers, educators, and researchers.
The success of ChatGPT was unprecedented and popularized more research into the
technology behind it, namely large language models (LLMs). Both proprietary and
public models were being released at a steady pace, closing in on, and eventually
catching up to the performance of ChatGPT. It is not an exaggeration to state that
almost all attention was on LLMs.
As a result, 2023 will always be known, at least to us, as the year that drastically
changed our field, Language Artificial Intelligence (Language AI), a field character‐
ized by the development of systems capable of understanding and generating human
language.
However, LLMs have been around for a while now and smaller models are still rele‐
vant to this day. LLMs are much more than just a single model and there are many
other techniques and models in the field of language AI that are worth exploring.
In this book, we aim to give readers a solid understanding of the fundamentals
of both LLMs and the field of Language AI in general. This chapter serves as the
3
1 J. McCarthy (2007). “What is artificial intelligence?” Retrieved from https://oreil.ly/C7sja and https://oreil.ly/
n9X8O.
scaffolding for the rest of the book and will introduce concepts and terms that we will
use throughout the chapters.
But mostly, we intend to answer the following questions in this chapter:
• What is Language AI?
• What are large language models?
• What are the common use cases and applications of large language models?
• How can we use large language models ourselves?
What Is Language AI?
The term artificial intelligence (AI) is often used to describe computer systems dedica‐
ted to performing tasks close to human intelligence, such as speech recognition, lan‐
guage translation, and visual perception. It is the intelligence of software as opposed
to the intelligence of humans.
Here is a more formal definition by one of the founders of the artificial intelligence
discipline:
[Artificial intelligence is] the science and engineering of making intelligent machines,
especially intelligent computer programs. It is related to the similar task of using
computers to understand human intelligence, but AI does not have to confine itself to
methods that are biologically observable.
—John McCarthy, 20071
Due to the ever-evolving nature of AI, the term has been used to describe a wide
variety of systems, some of which might not truly embody intelligent behavior. For
instance, characters in computer games (NPCs [nonplayable characters]) have often
been referred to as AI even though many are nothing more than if-else statements.
Language AI refers to a subfield of AI that focuses on developing technologies
capable of understanding, processing, and generating human language. The term
Language AI can often be used interchangeably with natural language processing
(NLP) with the continued success of machine learning methods in tackling language
processing problems.
4 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
We use the term Language AI to encompass technologies that technically might not
be LLMs but still have a significant impact on the field, like how retrieval systems can
give LLMs superpowers (see Chapter 8).
Throughout this book, we want to focus on the models that have had a major role
in shaping the field of Language AI. This means exploring more than just LLMs in
isolation. That, however, brings us to the question: what are large language models?
To begin answering this question in this chapter, let’s first explore the history of
Language AI.
A Recent History of Language AI
The history of Language AI encompasses many developments and models aiming to
represent and generate language, as illustrated in Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-1. A peek into the history of Language AI.
Language, however, is a tricky concept for computers. Text is unstructured in nature
and loses its meaning when represented by zeros and ones (individual characters).
As a result, throughout the history of Language AI, there has been a large focus on
representing language in a structured manner so that it can more easily be used by
computers. Examples of these Language AI tasks are provided in Figure 1-2.
A Recent History of Language AI | 5
2 Fabrizio Sebastiani. “Machine learning in automated text categorization.” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
34.1 (2002): 1–47.
Figure 1-2. Language AI is capable of many tasks by processing textual input.
Representing Language as a Bag-of-Words
Our history of Language AI starts with a technique called bag-of-words, a method for
representing unstructured text.2
 It was first mentioned around the 1950s but became
popular around the 2000s.
Bag-of-words works as follows: let’s assume that we have two sentences for which we
want to create numerical representations. The first step of the bag-of-words model
is tokenization, the process of splitting up the sentences into individual words or
subwords (tokens), as illustrated in Figure 1-3.
Figure 1-3. Each sentence is split into words (tokens) by splitting on a whitespace.
The most common method for tokenization is by splitting on a whitespace to create
individual words. However, this has its disadvantages as some languages, like Man‐
darin, do not have whitespaces around individual words. In the next chapter, we will
6 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
go in depth about tokenization and how that technique influences language models.
As illustrated in Figure 1-4, after tokenization, we combine all unique words from
each sentence to create a vocabulary that we can use to represent the sentences.
Figure 1-4. A vocabulary is created by retaining all unique words across both sentences.
Using our vocabulary, we simply count how often a word in each sentence appears,
quite literally creating a bag of words. As a result, a bag-of-words model aims to
create representations of text in the form of numbers, also called vectors or vector
representations, observed in Figure 1-5. Throughout the book, we refer to these kinds
of models as representation models.
Figure 1-5. A bag-of-words is created by counting individual words. These values are
referred to as vector representations.
Although bag-of-words is a classic method, it is by no means completely obsolete.
In Chapter 5, we will explore how it can still be used to complement more recent
language models.
A Recent History of Language AI | 7
3 Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space.” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
Better Representations with Dense Vector Embeddings
Bag-of-words, although an elegant approach, has a flaw. It considers language to be
nothing more than an almost literal bag of words and ignores the semantic nature, or
meaning, of text.
Released in 2013, word2vec was one of the first successful attempts at capturing the
meaning of text in embeddings.
3
 Embeddings are vector representations of data that
attempt to capture its meaning. To do so, word2vec learns semantic representations of
words by training on vast amounts of textual data, like the entirety of Wikipedia.
To generate these semantic representations, word2vec leverages neural networks.
These networks consist of interconnected layers of nodes that process information.
As illustrated in Figure 1-6, neural networks can have many layers where each
connection has a certain weight depending on the input. These weights are often
referred to as the parameters of the model.
Figure 1-6. A neural network consists of interconnected layers of nodes where each
connection is a linear equation.
Using these neural networks, word2vec generates word embeddings by looking at
which other words they tend to appear next to in a given sentence. We start by
assigning every word in our vocabulary with a vector embedding, say of 50 values for
each word initialized with random values. Then in every training step, as illustrated
in Figure 1-7, we take pairs of words from the training data and a model attempts to
predict whether or not they are likely to be neighbors in a sentence.
8 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
During this training process, word2vec learns the relationship between words and
distills that information into the embedding. If the two words tend to have the
same neighbors, their embeddings will be closer to one another and vice versa. In
Chapter 2, we will look closer at word2vec’s training procedure.
Figure 1-7. A neural network is trained to predict if two words are neighbors. During
this process, the embeddings are updated to be in line with the ground truth.
The resulting embeddings capture the meaning of words but what exactly does that
mean? To illustrate this phenomenon, let’s somewhat oversimplify and imagine we
have embeddings of several words, namely “apple” and “baby.” Embeddings attempt
to capture meaning by representing the properties of words. For instance, the word
“baby” might score high on the properties “newborn” and “human” while the word
“apple” scores low on these properties.
As illustrated in Figure 1-8, embeddings can have many properties to represent the
meaning of a word. Since the size of embeddings is fixed, their properties are chosen
to create a mental representation of the word.
Figure 1-8. The values of embeddings represent properties that are used to represent
words. We may oversimplify by imagining that dimensions represent concepts (which
they don’t), but it helps express the idea.
In practice, these properties are often quite obscure and seldom relate to a single
entity or humanly identifiable concept. However, together, these properties make
sense to a computer and serve as a good way to translate human language into
computer language.
A Recent History of Language AI | 9
Embeddings are tremendously helpful as they allow us to measure the semantic
similarity between two words. Using various distance metrics, we can judge how close
one word is to another. As illustrated in Figure 1-9, if we were to compress these
embeddings into a two-dimensional representation, you would notice that words
with similar meaning tend to be closer. In Chapter 5, we will explore how to compress
these embeddings into n-dimensional space.
Figure 1-9. Embeddings of words that are similar will be close to each other in dimen‐
sional space.
Types of Embeddings
There are many types of embeddings, like word embeddings and sentence embed‐
dings that are used to indicate different levels of abstractions (word versus sentence),
as illustrated in Figure 1-10.
Bag-of-words, for instance, creates embeddings at a document level since it repre‐
sents the entire document. In contrast, word2vec generates embeddings for words
only.
Throughout the book, embeddings will take on a central role as they are utilized in
many use cases, such as classification (see Chapter 4), clustering (see Chapter 5), and
semantic search and retrieval-augmented generation (see Chapter 8). In Chapter 2,
we will take our first deep dive into token embeddings.
10 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
Figure 1-10. Embeddings can be created for different types of input.
Encoding and Decoding Context with Attention
The training process of word2vec creates static, downloadable representations of
words. For instance, the word “bank” will always have the same embedding regardless
of the context in which it is used. However, “bank” can refer to both a financial bank
as well as the bank of a river. Its meaning, and therefore its embeddings, should
change depending on the context.
A step in encoding this text was achieved through recurrent neural networks (RNNs).
These are variants of neural networks that can model sequences as an additional
input.
To do so, these RNNs are used for two tasks, encoding or representing an input
sentence and decoding or generating an output sentence. Figure 1-11 illustrates this
concept by showing how a sentence like “I love llamas” gets translated to the Dutch
“Ik hou van lama’s.”
A Recent History of Language AI | 11
Figure 1-11. Two recurrent neural networks (decoder and encoder) translating an input
sequence from English to Dutch.
Each step in this architecture is autoregressive. When generating the next word,
this architecture needs to consume all previously generated words, as shown in
Figure 1-12.
Figure 1-12. Each previous output token is used as input to generate the next token.
The encoding step aims to represent the input as well as possible, generating the
context in the form of an embedding, which serves as the input for the decoder. To
generate this representation, it takes embeddings as its inputs for words, which means
we can use word2vec for the initial representations. In Figure 1-13, we can observe
this process. Note how the inputs are processed sequentially, one at a time, as well as
the output.
12 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
4 Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
Figure 1-13. Using word2vec embeddings, a context embedding is generated that repre‐
sents the entire sequence.
This context embedding, however, makes it difficult to deal with longer sentences
since it is merely a single embedding representing the entire input. In 2014, a solution
called attention was introduced that highly improved upon the original architecture.4
Attention allows a model to focus on parts of the input sequence that are relevant
to one another (“attend” to each other) and amplify their signal, as shown in Fig‐
ure 1-14. Attention selectively determines which words are most important in a given
sentence.
For instance, the output word “lama’s” is Dutch for “llamas,” which is why the atten‐
tion between both is high. Similarly, the words “lama’s” and “I” have lower attention
since they aren’t as related. In Chapter 3, we will go more in depth on the attention
mechanism.
A Recent History of Language AI | 13
Figure 1-14. Attention allows a model to “attend” to certain parts of sequences that
might relate more or less to one another.
By adding these attention mechanisms to the decoder step, the RNN can generate
signals for each input word in the sequence related to the potential output. Instead of
passing only a context embedding to the decoder, the hidden states of all input words
are passed. This process is demonstrated in Figure 1-15.
Figure 1-15. After generating the words “Ik,” “hou,” and “van,” the attention mechanism
of the decoder enables it to focus on the word “llamas” before it generates the Dutch
translation (“lama’s”).
As a result, during the generation of “Ik hou van lama’s,” the RNN keeps track of
the words it mostly attends to perform the translation. Compared to word2vec, this
architecture allows for representing the sequential nature of text and the context
in which it appears by “attending” to the entire sentence. This sequential nature,
however, precludes parallelization during training of the model.
14 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
5 Ashish Vaswani et al. “Attention is all you need.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (2017).
Attention Is All You Need
The true power of attention, and what drives the amazing abilities of large lan‐
guage models, was first explored in the well-known “Attention is all you need”
paper released in 2017.5
 The authors proposed a network architecture called the
Transformer, which was solely based on the attention mechanism and removed the
recurrence network that we saw previously. Compared to the recurrence network, the
Transformer could be trained in parallel, which tremendously sped up training.
In the Transformer, encoding and decoder components are stacked on top of each
other, as illustrated in Figure 1-16. This architecture remains autoregressive, needing
to consume each generated word before creating a new word.
Figure 1-16. The Transformer is a combination of stacked encoder and decoder blocks
where the input flows through each encoder and decoder.
Now, both the encoder and decoder blocks would revolve around attention instead
of leveraging an RNN with attention features. The encoder block in the Transformer
consists of two parts, self-attention and a feedforward neural network, which are
shown in Figure 1-17.
A Recent History of Language AI | 15
Figure 1-17. An encoder block revolves around self-attention to generate intermediate
representations.
Compared to previous methods of attention, self-attention can attend to different
positions within a single sequence, thereby more easily and accurately representing
the input sequence as illustrated in Figure 1-18. Instead of processing one token at a
time, it can be used to look at the entire sequence in one go.
Figure 1-18. Self-attention attends to all parts of the input sequence so that it can “look”
both forward and back in a single sequence.
Compared to the encoder, the decoder has an additional layer that pays attention to
the output of the encoder (to find the relevant parts of the input). As demonstrated
in Figure 1-19, this process is similar to the RNN attention decoder that we discussed
previously.
16 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
Figure 1-19. The decoder has an additional attention layer that attends to the output of
the encoder.
As shown in Figure 1-20, the self-attention layer in the decoder masks future posi‐
tions so it only attends to earlier positions to prevent leaking information when
generating the output.
Figure 1-20. Only attend to previous tokens to prevent “looking into the future.”
Together, these building blocks create the Transformer architecture and are the foun‐
dation of many impactful models in Language AI, such as BERT and GPT-1, which
we cover later in this chapter. Throughout this book, most models that we will use are
Transformer-based models.
A Recent History of Language AI | 17
6 Jacob Devlin et al. “BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
There is much more to the Transformer architecture than what we explored thus
far. In Chapters 2 and 3, we will go through the many reasons why Transformer
models work so well, including multi-head attention, positional embeddings, and
layer normalization.
Representation Models: Encoder-Only Models
The original Transformer model is an encoder-decoder architecture that serves trans‐
lation tasks well but cannot easily be used for other tasks, like text classification.
In 2018, a new architecture called Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans‐
formers (BERT) was introduced that could be leveraged for a wide variety of tasks
and would serve as the foundation of Language AI for years to come.6 BERT is
an encoder-only architecture that focuses on representing language, as illustrated
in Figure 1-21. This means that it only uses the encoder and removes the decoder
entirely.
Figure 1-21. The architecture of a BERT base model with 12 encoders.
These encoder blocks are the same as we saw before: self-attention followed by
feedforward neural networks. The input contains an additional token, the [CLS] or
classification token, which is used as the representation for the entire input. Often,
we use this [CLS] token as the input embedding for fine-tuning the model on specific
tasks, like classification.
18 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
Training these encoder stacks can be a difficult task that BERT approaches by adopt‐
ing a technique called masked language modeling (see Chapters 2 and 11). As shown
in Figure 1-22, this method masks a part of the input for the model to predict. This
prediction task is difficult but allows BERT to create more accurate (intermediate)
representations of the input.
Figure 1-22. Train a BERT model by using masked language modeling.
This architecture and training procedure makes BERT and related architectures
incredible at representing contextual language. BERT-like models are commonly used
for transfer learning, which involves first pretraining it for language modeling and
then fine-tuning it for a specific task. For instance, by training BERT on the entirety
of Wikipedia, it learns to understand the semantic and contextual nature of text.
Then, as shown in Figure 1-23, we can use that pretrained model to fine-tune it for a
specific task, like text classification.
Figure 1-23. After pretraining BERT on masked language model, we fine-tune it for
specific tasks.
A huge benefit of pretrained models is that most of the training is already done for
us. Fine-tuning on specific tasks is generally less compute-intensive and requires less
data. Moreover, BERT-like models generate embeddings at almost every step in their
A Recent History of Language AI | 19
7 Alec Radford et al. “Improving language understanding by generative pre-training”, (2018).
8 Alec Radford et al. “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners.” OpenAI Blog 1.8 (2019): 9.
9 Tom Brown et al. “Language models are few-shot learners.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
33 (2020): 1877–1901.
architecture. This also makes BERT models feature extraction machines without the
need to fine-tune them on a specific task.
Encoder-only models, like BERT, will be used in many parts of the book. For years,
they have been and are still used for common tasks, including classification tasks (see
Chapter 4), clustering tasks (see Chapter 5), and semantic search (see Chapter 8).
Throughout the book, we will refer to encoder-only models as representation models
to differentiate them from decoder-only, which we refer to as generative models.
Note that the main distinction does not lie between the underlying architecture and
the way these models work. Representation models mainly focus on representing
language, for instance, by creating embeddings, and typically do not generate text. In
contrast, generative models focus primarily on generating text and typically are not
trained to generate embeddings.
The distinction between representation and generative models and components will
also be shown in most images. Representation models are teal with a small vector
icon (to indicate its focus on vectors and embeddings) whilst generative models are
pink with a small chat icon (to indicate its generative capabilities).
Generative Models: Decoder-Only Models
Similar to the encoder-only architecture of BERT, a decoder-only architecture was
proposed in 2018 to target generative tasks.7 This architecture was called a Generative
Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) for its generative capabilities (it’s now known as
GPT-1 to distinguish it from later versions). As shown in Figure 1-24, it stacks
decoder blocks similar to the encoder-stacked architecture of BERT.
GPT-1 was trained on a corpus of 7,000 books and Common Crawl, a large dataset of
web pages. The resulting model consisted of 117 million parameters. Each parameter
is a numerical value that represents the model’s understanding of language.
If everything remains the same, we expect more parameters to greatly influence the
capabilities and performance of language models. Keeping this in mind, we saw larger
and larger models being released at a steady pace. As illustrated in Figure 1-25, GPT-2
had 1.5 billion parameters8
 and GPT-3 used 175 billion parameters9
 quickly followed.
20 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
Figure 1-24. The architecture of a GPT-1. It uses a decoder-only architecture and
removes the encoder-attention block.
Figure 1-25. GPT models quickly grew in size with each iteration.
A Recent History of Language AI | 21
These generative decoder-only models, especially the “larger” models, are commonly
referred to as large language models (LLMs). As we will discuss later in this chapter,
the term LLM is not only reserved for generative models (decoder-only) but also
representation models (encoder-only).
Generative LLMs, as sequence-to-sequence machines, take in some text and attempt
to autocomplete it. Although a handy feature, their true power shone from being
trained as a chatbot. Instead of completing a text, what if they could be trained to
answer questions? By fine-tuning these models, we can create instruct or chat models
that can follow directions.
As illustrated in Figure 1-26, the resulting model could take in a user query (prompt)
and output a response that would most likely follow that prompt. As such, you will
often hear that generative models are completion models.
Figure 1-26. Generative LLMs take in some input and try to complete it. With instruct
models, this is more than just autocomplete and attempts to answer the question.
A vital part of these completion models is something called the context length or
context window. The context length represents the maximum number of tokens the
model can process, as shown in Figure 1-27. A large context window allows entire
documents to be passed to the LLM. Note that due to the autoregressive nature of
these models, the current context length will increase as new tokens are generated.
22 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
10 OpenAI, “Gpt-4 technical report.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 (2023).
Figure 1-27. The context length is the maximum context an LLM can handle.
The Year of Generative AI
LLMs had a tremendous impact on the field and led some to call 2023 The Year of
Generative AI with the release, adoption, and media coverage of ChatGPT (GPT-3.5).
When we refer to ChatGPT, we are actually talking about the product and not the
underlying model. When it was first released, it was powered by the GPT-3.5 LLM
and has since then grown to include several more performant variants, such as
GPT-4.10
GPT-3.5 was not the only model that made its impact in the Year of Generative AI.
As illustrated in Figure 1-28, both open source and proprietary LLMs have made
their way to the people at an incredible pace. These open source base models are
often referred to as foundation models and can be fine-tuned for specific tasks, like
following instructions.
A Recent History of Language AI | 23
11 Albert Gu and Tri Dao. “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces.” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00752 (2023).
12 See “A Visual Guide to Mamba and State Space Models” for an illustrated and visual guide to Mamba as an
alternative to the Transformer architecture.
13 Bo Peng et al. “RWKV: Reinventing RNNs for the transformer era.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13048 (2023).
Figure 1-28. A comprehensive view into the Year of Generative AI. Note that many
models are still missing from this overview!
Apart from the widely popular Transformer architecture, new promising architec‐
tures have emerged such as Mamba11,12 and RWKV.13 These novel architectures
attempt to reach Transformer-level performance with additional advantages, like
larger context windows or faster inference.
These developments exemplify the evolution of the field and showcase 2023 as a truly
hectic year for AI. It took all we had to just keep up with the many developments,
both within and outside of Language AI.
As such, this book explores more than just the latest LLMs. We will explore how
other models, such as embedding models, encoder-only models, and even bag-ofwords can be used to empower LLMs.
24 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
The Moving Definition of a “Large Language Model”
In our travels through the recent history of Language AI, we observed that primarily
generative decoder-only (Transformer) models are commonly referred to as large
language models. Especially if they are considered to be “large.” In practice, this seems
like a rather constrained description!
What if we create a model with the same capabilities as GPT-3 but 10 times smaller?
Would such a model fall outside the “large” language model categorization?
Similarly, what if we released a model as big as GPT-4 that can perform accurate
text classification but does not have any generative capabilities? Would it still qualify
as a large “language model” if its primary function is not language generation, even
though it still represents text?
The problem with these kinds of definitions is that we exclude capable models. What
name we give one model or the other does not change how it behaves.
Since the definition of the term “large language model” tends to evolve with the
release of new models, we want to be explicit in what it means for this book. “Large”
is arbitrary and what might be considered a large model today could be small tomor‐
row. There are currently many names for the same thing and to us, “large language
models” are also models that do not generate text and can be run on consumer
hardware.
As such, aside from covering generative models, this book will also cover models with
fewer than 1 billion parameters that do not generate text. We will explore how other
models, such as embedding models, representation models, and even bag-of-words
can be used to empower LLMs.
The Training Paradigm of Large Language Models
Traditional machine learning generally involves training a model for a specific task,
like classification. As shown in Figure 1-29, we consider this to be a one-step process.
Figure 1-29. Traditional machine learning involves a single step: training a model for a
specific target task, like classification or regression.
The Training Paradigm of Large Language Models | 25
14 Hugo Touvron et al. “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288
(2023).
Creating LLMs, in contrast, typically consists of at least two steps:
Language modeling
The first step, called pretraining, takes the majority of computation and training
time. An LLM is trained on a vast corpus of internet text allowing the model
to learn grammar, context, and language patterns. This broad training phase is
not yet directed toward specific tasks or applications beyond predicting the next
word. The resulting model is often referred to as a foundation model or base
model. These models generally do not follow instructions.
Fine-tuning
The second step, fine-tuning or sometimes post-training, involves using the previ‐
ously trained model and further training it on a narrower task. This allows the
LLM to adapt to specific tasks or to exhibit desired behavior. For example, we
could fine-tune a base model to perform well on a classification task or to follow
instructions. It saves massive amounts of resources because the pretraining phase
is quite costly and generally requires data and computing resources that are
out of the reach of most people and organizations. For instance, Llama 2 has
been trained on a dataset containing 2 trillion tokens.14 Imagine the compute
necessary to create that model! In Chapter 12, we will go over several methods
for fine-tuning foundation models on your dataset.
Any model that goes through the first step, pretraining, we consider a pretrained
model, which also includes fine-tuned models. This two-step approach of training is
visualized in Figure 1-30.
Figure 1-30. Compared to traditional machine learning, LLM training takes a multistep
approach.
Additional fine-tuning steps can be added to further align the model with the user’s
preferences, as we will explore in Chapter 12.
26 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
Large Language Model Applications: What Makes Them
So Useful?
The nature of LLMs makes them suitable for a wide range of tasks. With text genera‐
tion and prompting, it almost seems as if your imagination is the limit. To illustrate,
let’s explore some common tasks and techniques:
Detecting whether a review left by a customer is positive or negative
This is (supervised) classification and can be handled with both encoder- and
decoder-only models either with pretrained models (see Chapter 4) or by finetuning models (see Chapter 11).
Developing a system for finding common topics in ticket issues
This is (unsupervised) classification for which we have no predefined labels.
We can leverage encoder-only models to perform the classification itself and
decoder-only models for labeling the topics (see Chapter 5).
Building a system for retrieval and inspection of relevant documents
A major component of language model systems is their ability to add external
resources of information. Using semantic search, we can build systems that allow
us to easily access and find information for an LLM to use (see Chapter 8).
Improve your system by creating or fine-tuning a custom embedding model (see
Chapter 12).
Constructing an LLM chatbot that can leverage external resources, such as tools and
documents
This is a combination of techniques that demonstrates how the true power of
LLMs can be found through additional components. Methods such as prompt
engineering (see Chapter 6), retrieval-augmented generation (see Chapter 8), and
fine-tuning an LLM (see Chapter 12) are all pieces of the LLM puzzle.
Constructing an LLM capable of writing recipes based on a picture showing the products
in your fridge
This is a multimodal task where the LLM takes in an image and reasons about
what it sees (see Chapter 9). LLMs are being adapted to other modalities, such as
Vision, which opens a wide variety of interesting use cases.
LLM applications are incredibly satisfying to create since they are partially bounded
by the things you can imagine. As these models grow more accurate, using them in
practice for creative use cases such as role-playing and writing children’s books simply
becomes more and more fun.
Large Language Model Applications: What Makes Them So Useful? | 27
Responsible LLM Development and Usage
The impact of LLMs has been and likely continues to be significant due to their wide‐
spread adoption. As we explore the incredible capabilities of LLMs it is important to
keep their societal and ethical implications in mind. Several key points to consider:
Bias and fairness
LLMs are trained on large amounts of data that might contain biases. LLMs
might learn from these biases, start to reproduce them, and potentially amplify
them. Since the data on which LLMs are trained are seldom shared, it remains
unclear what potential biases they might contain unless you try them out.
Transparency and accountability
Due to LLMs’ incredible capabilities, it is not always clear when you are talking
with a human or an LLM. As such, the usage of LLMs when interacting with
humans can have unintended consequences when there is no human in the
loop. For instance, LLM-based applications used in the medical field might be
regulated as medical devices since they could affect a patient’s well-being.
Generating harmful content
An LLM does not necessarily generate ground-truth content and might confi‐
dently output incorrect text. Moreover, they can be used to generate fake news,
articles, and other misleading sources of information.
Intellectual property
Is the output of an LLM your intellectual property or that of the LLM’s creator?
When the output is similar to a phrase in the training data, does the intellectual
property belong to the author of that phrase? Without access to the training data
it remains unclear when copyrighted material is being used by the LLM.
Regulation
Due to the enormous impact of LLMs, governments are starting to regulate
commercial applications. An example is the European AI Act, which regulates
the development and deployment of foundation models including LLMs.
As you develop and use LLMs, we want to stress the importance of ethical considera‐
tions and urge you to learn more about the safe and responsible use of LLMs and AI
systems in general.
Limited Resources Are All You Need
The compute resources that we have referenced several times thus far generally relate
to the GPU(s) you have available on your system. A powerful GPU (graphics card)
will make both training and using LLMs much more efficient and faster.
28 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
15 The models were trained for 3,311,616 GPU hours, which refers to the amount of time it takes to train a
model on a GPU, multiplied by the number of GPUs available.
In choosing a GPU, an important component is the amount of VRAM (video
random-access memory) you have available. This refers to the amount of memory
you have available on your GPU. In practice, the more VRAM you have the better.
The reason for this is that some models simply cannot be used at all if you do not
have sufficient VRAM.
Because training and fine-tuning LLMs can be an expensive process, GPU-wise, those
without a powerful GPU have often been referred to as the GPU-poor. This illustrates
the battle for computing resources to train these huge models. To create the Llama 2
family of models, for example, Meta used A100-80 GB GPUs. Assuming renting such
a GPU would cost $1.50/hr, the total costs of creating these models would exceed
$5,000,000!15
Unfortunately, there is no single rule to determine exactly how much VRAM you
need for a specific model. It depends on the model’s architecture and size, compres‐
sion technique, context size, backend for running the model, etc.
This book is for the GPU-poor! We will use models that users can run without the
most expensive GPU(s) available or a big budget. To do so, we will make all the code
available in Google Colab instances. At the time of writing, a free instance of Google
Colab will net you a T4 GPU with 16 GB VRAM, which is the minimum amount of
VRAM that we suggest.
Interfacing with Large Language Models
Interfacing with LLMs is a vital component of not only using them but also develop‐
ing an understanding of their inner workings. Due to the many developments in
the field, there has been an abundance of techniques, methods, and packages for
communicating with LLMs. Throughout the book, we intend to explore the most
common techniques for doing so, including using both proprietary (closed source)
and publicly available open models.
Proprietary, Private Models
Closed source LLMs are models that do not have their weights and architecture
shared with the public. They are developed by specific organizations with their
underlying code being kept secret. Examples of such models include OpenAI’s GPT-4
and Anthropic’s Claude. These proprietary models are generally backed by significant
commercial support and have been developed and integrated within their services.
Interfacing with Large Language Models | 29
You can access these models through an interface that communicates with the LLM,
called an API (application programming interface), as illustrated in Figure 1-31. For
instance, to use ChatGPT in Python you can use OpenAI’s package to interface with
the service without directly accessing it.
Figure 1-31. Closed source LLMs are accessed by an interface (API). As a result, details
of the LLM itself, including its code and architecture are not shared with the user.
A huge benefit of proprietary models is that the user does not need to have a strong
GPU to use the LLM. The provider takes care of hosting and running the model and
generally has more computing available. There is no expertise necessary concerning
hosting and using the model, which lowers the barrier to entry significantly. More‐
over, these models tend to be more performant than their open source counterparts
due to the significant investment from these organizations.
A downside to this is that it can be a costly service. The provider manages the risk
and costs of hosting the LLM, which often translates to a paid service. Moreover,
since there is no direct access to the model, there is no method to fine-tune it
yourself. Lastly, your data is shared with the provider, which is not desirable in many
common use cases, such as sharing patient data.
Open Models
Open LLMs are models that share their weights and architecture with the public to
use. They are still developed by specific organizations but often share their code for
creating or running the model locally—with varying levels of licensing that may or
may not allow commercial usage of the model. Cohere’s Command R, the Mistral
models, Microsoft’s Phi, and Meta’s Llama models are all examples of open models.
There are ongoing discussions as to what truly represents an open
source model. For instance, some publicly shared models have a
permissive commercial license, which means that the model cannot
be used for commercial purposes. For many, this is not the true
definition of open source, which states that using these models
should not have any restrictions. Similarly, the data on which a
model is trained as well as its source code are seldom shared.
30 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
You can download these models and use them on your device as long as you have a
powerful GPU that can handle these kinds of models, as shown in Figure 1-32.
Figure 1-32. Open source LLMs are directly by the user. As a result, details of the LLM
itself including its code and architecture are shared with the user.
A major advantage of these local models is that you, the user, have complete control
over the model. You can use the model without depending on the API connection,
fine-tune it, and run sensitive data through it. You are not dependent on any service
and have complete transparency of the processes that lead to the output of the model.
This benefit is enhanced by the large communities that enable these processes, such
as Hugging Face, demonstrating the possibilities of collaborative efforts.
A downside is that you need powerful hardware to run these models and even more
when training or fine-tuning them. Moreover, it requires specific knowledge to set up
and use these models (which we will cover throughout this book).
We generally prefer using open source models wherever we can. The freedom this
gives to play around with options, explore the inner workings, and use the model
locally arguably provides more benefits than using proprietary LLMs.
Open Source Frameworks
Compared to closed source LLMs, open source LLMs require you to use certain pack‐
ages to run them. In 2023, many different packages and frameworks were released
that, each in their own way, interact with and make use of LLMs. Wading through
hundreds upon hundreds of potentially worthwhile frameworks is not the most
enjoyable experience.
As a result, you might even miss your favorite framework in this book!
Instead of attempting to cover every LLM framework in existence (there are too
many, and they continue to grow in number), we aim to provide you with a solid
foundation for leveraging LLMs. The idea is that after reading this book, you can
easily pick up most other frameworks as they all work in a very similar manner.
The intuition that we attempt to realize is an important component of this. If you
have an intuitive understanding of not only LLMs but also using them in practice
with common frameworks, branching out to others should be a straightforward task.
Interfacing with Large Language Models | 31
16 Marah Abdin et al. “Phi-3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your phone.” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.14219 (2024).
More specifically, we focus on backend packages. These are packages without a
GUI (graphical user interface) that are created for efficiently loading and running
any LLM on your device, such as llama.cpp, LangChain, and the core of many
frameworks, Hugging Face Transformers.
We will mostly cover frameworks for interacting with large lan‐
guage models through code. Although it helps you learn the
fundamentals of these frameworks, sometimes you just want a
ChatGPT-like interface with a local LLM. Fortunately, there are
many incredible frameworks that allow for this. A few examples
include text-generation-webui, KoboldCpp, and LM Studio.
Generating Your First Text
An important component of using language models is selecting them. The main
source for finding and downloading LLMs is the Hugging Face Hub. Hugging Face
is the organization behind the well-known Transformers package, which for years
has driven the development of language models in general. As the name implies, the
package was built on top of the transformers framework that we discussed in “A
Recent History of Language AI” on page 5.
At the time of writing, you will find more than 800,000 models on Hugging Face’s
platform for many different purposes, from LLMs and computer vision models to
models that work with audio and tabular data. Here, you can find almost any open
source LLM.
Although we will explore all kinds of models throughout this book, let’s start our first
lines of code with a generative model. The main generative model we use throughout
the book is Phi-3-mini, which is a relatively small (3.8 billion parameters) but quite
performant model.16 Due to its small size, the model can be run on devices with less
than 8 GB of VRAM. If you perform quantization, a type of compression that we will
further discuss in Chapters 7 and 12, you can use even less than 6 GB of VRAM.
Moreover, the model is licensed under the MIT license, which allows the model to be
used for commercial purposes without constraints!
Keep in mind that new and improved LLMs are frequently released. To ensure this
book remains current, most examples are designed to work with any LLM. We’ll also
highlight different models in the repository associated with this book for you to try
out.
Let’s get started! When you use an LLM, two models are loaded:
32 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
• The generative model itself
• Its underlying tokenizer
The tokenizer is in charge of splitting the input text into tokens before feeding it to
the generative model. You can find the tokenizer and model on the Hugging Face site
and only need the corresponding IDs to be passed. In this case, we use “microsoft/
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct” as the main path to the model.
We can use transformers to load both the tokenizer and model. Note that we assume
you have an NVIDIA GPU (device_map="cuda") but you can choose a different
device instead. If you do not have access to a GPU you can use the free Google Colab
notebooks we made available in the repository of this book:
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer
# Load model and tokenizer
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
 "microsoft/Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct",
 device_map="cuda",
 torch_dtype="auto",
 trust_remote_code=True,
)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("microsoft/Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct")
Running the code will start downloading the model and depending on your internet
connection can take a couple of minutes.
Although we now have enough to start generating text, there is a nice trick in trans‐
formers that simplifies the process, namely transformers.pipeline. It encapsulates
the model, tokenizer, and text generation process into a single function:
from transformers import pipeline
# Create a pipeline
generator = pipeline(
 "text-generation",
 model=model,
 tokenizer=tokenizer,
 return_full_text=False,
 max_new_tokens=500,
 do_sample=False
)
The following parameters are worth mentioning:
return_full_text
By setting this to False, the prompt will not be returned but merely the output of
the model.
Generating Your First Text | 33
max_new_tokens
The maximum number of tokens the model will generate. By setting a limit, we
prevent long and unwieldy output as some models might continue generating
output until they reach their context window.
do_sample
Whether the model uses a sampling strategy to choose the next token. By setting
this to False, the model will always select the next most probable token. In
Chapter 6, we explore several sampling parameters that invoke some creativity in
the model’s output.
To generate our first text, let’s instruct the model to tell a joke about chickens. To do
so, we format the prompt in a list of dictionaries where each dictionary relates to an
entity in the conversation. Our role is that of “user” and we use the “content” key to
define our prompt:
# The prompt (user input / query)
messages = [
 {"role": "user", "content": "Create a funny joke about chickens."}
]
# Generate output
output = generator(messages)
print(output[0]["generated_text"])
Why don't chickens like to go to the gym? Because they can't crack the eggsistence of it!
And that is it! The first text generated in this book was a decent joke about chickens.
Summary
In this first chapter of the book, we delved into the revolutionary impact LLMs have
had on the Language AI field. It has significantly changed our approach to tasks such
as translation, classification, summarization, and more. Through a recent history of
Language AI, we explored the fundamentals of several types of LLMs, from a simple
bag-of-words representation to more complex representations using neural networks.
34 | Chapter 1: An Introduction to Large Language Models
We discussed the attention mechanism as a step toward encoding context within
models, a vital component of what makes LLMs so capable. We touched on two
main categories of models that use this incredible mechanism: representation models
(encoder-only) like BERT and generative models (decoder-only) like the GPT family
of models. Both categories are considered large language models throughout this
book.
Overall, the chapter provided an overview of the landscape of Language AI, including
its applications, societal and ethical implications, and the resources needed to run
such models. We ended by generating our first text using Phi-3, a model that will be
used throughout the book.
In the next two chapters, you will learn about some underlying processes. We start by
exploring tokenization and embeddings in Chapter 2, two often underestimated but
vital components of the Language AI field. What follows in Chapter 3 is an in-depth
look into language models where you will discover the precise methods used for
generating text.
Summary | 35
CHAPTER 2
Tokens and Embeddings
Tokens and embeddings are two of the central concepts of using large language
models (LLMs). As we’ve seen in the first chapter, they’re not only important to
understanding the history of Language AI, but we cannot have a clear sense of how
LLMs work, how they’re built, and where they will go in the future without a good
sense of tokens and embeddings, as we can see in Figure 2-1.
Figure 2-1. Language models deal with text in small chunks called tokens. For the lan‐
guage model to compute language, it needs to turn tokens into numeric representations
called embeddings.
In this chapter, we look more closely at what tokens are and the tokenization meth‐
ods used to power LLMs. We will then dive into the famous word2vec embedding
method that preceded modern-day LLMs and see how it’s extending the concept
of token embeddings to build commercial recommendation systems that power a
lot of the apps you use. Finally, we go from token embeddings into sentence or
37
text embeddings, where a whole sentence or document can have one vector that
represents it—enabling applications like semantic search and topic modeling that we
see in Part II of this book.
LLM Tokenization
The way the majority of people interact with language models, at the time of this
writing, is through a web playground that presents a chat interface between the user
and a language model. You may notice that a model does not produce its output
response all at once; it actually generates one token at a time.
But tokens aren’t only the output of a model, they’re also the way in which the model
sees its inputs. A text prompt sent to the model is first broken down into tokens, as
we’ll now see.
How Tokenizers Prepare the Inputs to the Language Model
Viewed from the outside, generative LLMs take an input prompt and generate a
response, as we can see in Figure 2-2.
Figure 2-2. High-level view of a language model and its input prompt.
Before the prompt is presented to the language model, however, it first has to go
through a tokenizer that breaks it into pieces. You can find an example showing the
tokenizer of GPT-4 on the OpenAI Platform. If we feed it the input text, it shows the
output in Figure 2-3, where each token is shown in a different color.
38 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
Figure 2-3. A tokenizer breaks down text into words or parts of words before the model
processes the text. It does so according to a specific method and training procedure (from
https://oreil.ly/ovUWO).
Let’s look at a code example and interact with these tokens ourselves. Here we’ll be
downloading an LLM and seeing how to tokenize the input before generating text
with the LLM.
Downloading and Running an LLM
Let’s start by loading our model and its tokenizer as we’ve done in Chapter 1:
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer
# Load model and tokenizer
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
 "microsoft/Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct",
 device_map="cuda",
 torch_dtype="auto",
 trust_remote_code=True,
)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("microsoft/Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct")
LLM Tokenization | 39
We can then proceed to the actual generation. We first declare our prompt, then
tokenize it, then pass those tokens to the model, which generates its output. In this
case, we’re asking the model to only generate 20 new tokens:
prompt = "Write an email apologizing to Sarah for the tragic gardening mishap.
Explain how it happened.<|assistant|>"
# Tokenize the input prompt
input_ids = tokenizer(prompt, return_tensors="pt").input_ids.to("cuda")
# Generate the text
generation_output = model.generate(
 input_ids=input_ids,
 max_new_tokens=20
)
# Print the output
print(tokenizer.decode(generation_output[0]))
Output:
<s> Write an email apologizing to Sarah for the tragic gardening mishap.
Explain how it happened.<|assistant|> Subject: My Sincere Apologies for the
Gardening Mishap
Dear
The text in bold is the 20 tokens generated by the model.
Looking at the code, we can see that the model does not in fact receive the text
prompt. Instead, the tokenizers processed the input prompt, and returned the infor‐
mation the model needed in the variable input_ids, which the model used as its
input.
Let’s print input_ids to see what it holds inside:
tensor([[ 1, 14350, 385, 4876, 27746, 5281, 304, 19235, 363, 278, 25305, 293,
16423, 292, 286, 728, 481, 29889, 12027, 7420, 920, 372, 9559, 29889, 32001]],
device='cuda:0')
This reveals the inputs that LLMs respond to, a series of integers as shown in
Figure 2-4. Each one is the unique ID for a specific token (character, word, or part of
a word). These IDs reference a table inside the tokenizer containing all the tokens it
knows.
40 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
Figure 2-4. A tokenizer processes the input prompt and prepares the actual input into
the language model: a list of token IDs. The specific token IDs in the figure are just
demonstrative.
If we want to inspect those IDs, we can use the tokenizer’s decode method to translate
the IDs back into text that we can read:
for id in input_ids[0]:
 print(tokenizer.decode(id))
This prints (each token is on a separate line):
<s>
Write
an
email
apolog
izing
to
Sarah
for
the
trag
ic
garden
ing
m
ish
LLM Tokenization | 41
ap
.
Exp
lain
how
it
happened
.
<|assistant|>
This is how the tokenizer broke down our input prompt. Notice the following:
• The first token is ID 1 (<s>), a special token indicating the beginning of the text.
• Some tokens are complete words (e.g., Write, an, email).
• Some tokens are parts of words (e.g., apolog, izing, trag, ic).
• Punctuation characters are their own token.
Notice how the space character does not have its own token. Instead, partial tokens
(like “izing” and “ic”) have a special hidden character at their beginning that indicates
that they’re connected with the token that precedes them in the text. Tokens without
that special character are assumed to have a space before them.
On the output side, we can also inspect the tokens generated by the model by printing
the generation_output variable. This shows the input tokens as well as the output
tokens (we’ll highlight the new tokens in bold):
tensor([[ 1, 14350, 385, 4876, 27746, 5281, 304, 19235, 363, 278,
25305, 293, 16423, 292, 286, 728, 481, 29889, 12027, 7420,
920, 372, 9559, 29889, 32001, 3323, 622, 29901, 1619, 317,
3742, 406, 6225, 11763, 363, 278, 19906, 292, 341, 728,
481, 13, 13, 29928, 799]], device='cuda:0')
This shows us the model generated the token 3323, 'Sub', followed by token 622,
'ject'. Together they formed the word 'Subject'. They were then followed by
token 29901, which is the colon ':'...and so on. Just like on the input side, we need
the tokenizer on the output side to translate the token ID into the actual text. We do
that using the tokenizer’s decode method. We can pass it an individual token ID or a
list of them:
42 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
print(tokenizer.decode(3323))
print(tokenizer.decode(622))
print(tokenizer.decode([3323, 622]))
print(tokenizer.decode(29901))
This outputs:
Sub
ject
Subject
:
How Does the Tokenizer Break Down Text?
There are three major factors that dictate how a tokenizer breaks down an input
prompt.
First, at model design time, the creator of the model chooses a tokenization method.
Popular methods include byte pair encoding (BPE) (widely used by GPT models) and
WordPiece (used by BERT). These methods are similar in that they aim to optimize
an efficient set of tokens to represent a text dataset, but they arrive at it in different
ways.
Second, after choosing the method, we need to make a number of tokenizer design
choices like vocabulary size and what special tokens to use. More on this in “Compar‐
ing Trained LLM Tokenizers” on page 46.
Third, the tokenizer needs to be trained on a specific dataset to establish the best
vocabulary it can use to represent that dataset. Even if we set the same methods
and parameters, a tokenizer trained on an English text dataset will be different from
another trained on a code dataset or a multilingual text dataset.
In addition to being used to process the input text into a language model, tokenizers
are used on the output of the language model to turn the resulting token ID into the
output word or token associated with it, as Figure 2-5 shows.
LLM Tokenization | 43
Figure 2-5. Tokenizers are also used to process the output of the model by converting the
output token ID into the word or token associated with that ID.
Word Versus Subword Versus Character Versus Byte Tokens
The tokenization scheme we just discussed is called subword tokenization. It’s the
most commonly used tokenization scheme but not the only one. The four notable
ways to tokenize are shown in Figure 2-6. Let’s go over them:
Word tokens
This approach was common with earlier methods like word2vec but is being
used less and less in NLP. Its usefulness, however, led it to be used outside of NLP
for use cases such as recommendation systems, as we’ll see later in the chapter.
One challenge with word tokenization is that the tokenizer may be unable to
deal with new words that enter the dataset after the tokenizer was trained. This
also results in a vocabulary that has a lot of tokens with minimal differences
between them (e.g., apology, apologize, apologetic, apologist). This latter chal‐
lenge is resolved by subword tokenization as it has a token for apolog, and then
suffix tokens (e.g., -y, -ize, -etic, -ist) that are common with many other tokens,
resulting in a more expressive vocabulary.
Subword tokens
This method contains full and partial words. In addition to the vocabulary
expressivity mentioned earlier, another benefit of the approach is its ability to
represent new words by breaking down the new token into smaller characters,
which tend to be a part of the vocabulary.
44 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
Figure 2-6. There are multiple methods of tokenization that break down the text to
different sizes of components (words, subwords, characters, and bytes).
Character tokens
This is another method that can deal successfully with new words because it
has the raw letters to fall back on. While that makes the representation easier
to tokenize, it makes the modeling more difficult. Where a model with subword
tokenization can represent “play” as one token, a model using character-level
tokens needs to model the information to spell out “p-l-a-y” in addition to
modeling the rest of the sequence.
Subword tokens present an advantage over character tokens in the ability to fit
more text within the limited context length of a Transformer model. So with a
model with a context length of 1,024, you may be able to fit about three times
as much text using subword tokenization than using character tokens (subword
tokens often average three characters per token).
Byte tokens
One additional tokenization method breaks down tokens into the individual
bytes that are used to represent unicode characters. Papers like “CANINE: Pretraining an efficient tokenization-free encoder for language representation” out‐
line methods like this, which are also called “tokenization-free encoding.” Other
works like “ByT5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte
LLM Tokenization | 45
models” show that this can be a competitive method, especially in multilingual
scenarios.
One distinction to highlight here: some subword tokenizers also include bytes as
tokens in their vocabulary as the final building block to fall back to when they
encounter characters they can’t otherwise represent. The GPT-2 and RoBERTa token‐
izers do this, for example. This doesn’t make them tokenization-free byte-level token‐
izers, because they don’t use these bytes to represent everything, only a subset, as we’ll
see in the next section.
If you want to go deeper into tokenizers, they are discussed in more detail in Design‐
ing Large Language Model Applications.
Comparing Trained LLM Tokenizers
We’ve pointed out earlier three major factors that dictate the tokens that appear
within a tokenizer: the tokenization method, the parameters and special tokens we
use to initialize the tokenizer, and the dataset the tokenizer is trained on. Let’s
compare and contrast a number of actual, trained tokenizers to see how these choices
change their behavior. This comparison will show us that newer tokenizers have
changed their behavior to improve model performance, and we’ll also see how spe‐
cialized models (like code generation models, for example) often need specialized
tokenizers.
We’ll use a number of tokenizers to encode the following text:
text = """
English and CAPITALIZATION
🎵鸟
show_tokens False None elif == >= else: two tabs:" " Three tabs: " "
12.0*50=600
"""
This will allow us to see how each tokenizer deals with a number of different kinds of
tokens:
• Capitalization.
• Languages other than English.
• Emojis.
• Programming code with keywords and whitespaces often used for indentation
(in languages like Python for example).
46 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
• Numbers and digits.
• Special tokens. These are unique tokens that have a role other than representing
text. They include tokens that indicate the beginning of the text, or the end of the
text (which is the way the model signals to the system that it has completed this
generation), or other functions as we’ll see.
Let’s go from older to newer tokenizers to see how they tokenize this text and what
that might say about the language model. We’ll tokenize the text, and then print each
token with a color background color using this function:
colors_list = [
 '102;194;165', '252;141;98', '141;160;203',
 '231;138;195', '166;216;84', '255;217;47'
]
def show_tokens(sentence, tokenizer_name):
 tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(tokenizer_name)
 token_ids = tokenizer(sentence).input_ids
 for idx, t in enumerate(token_ids):
 print(
 f'\x1b[0;30;48;2;{colors_list[idx % len(colors_list)]}m' +
 tokenizer.decode(t) +
 '\x1b[0m',
 end=' '
 )
BERT base model (uncased) (2018)
Link to the model on the HuggingFace model hub
Tokenization method: WordPiece, introduced in “Japanese and Korean voice search”:
Vocabulary size: 30,522
Special tokens:
unk_token [UNK]
An unknown token that the tokenizer has no specific encoding for.
sep_token [SEP]
A separator that enables certain tasks that require giving the model two texts (in
these cases, the model is called a cross-encoder). One example is reranking, as
we’ll see in Chapter 8.
pad_token [PAD]
A padding token used to pad unused positions in the model’s input (as the model
expects a certain length of input, its context-size).
LLM Tokenization | 47
cls_token [CLS]
A special classification token for classification tasks, as we’ll see in Chapter 4.
mask_token [MASK]
A masking token used to hide tokens during the training process.
Tokenized text:
[CLS] english and capital ##ization [UNK] [UNK] show _ token ##s false none
eli ##f = = > = else : two tab ##s : " " three tab ##s : " " 12 . 0 * 50 = 600 [SEP]
BERT was released in two major flavors: cased (where the capitalization is kept) and
uncased (where all capital letters are first turned into small cap letters). With the
uncased (and more popular) version of the BERT tokenizer, we notice the following:
• The newline breaks are gone, which makes the model blind to information
encoded in newlines (e.g., a chat log when each turn is in a new line).
• All the text is in lowercase.
• The word “capitalization” is encoded as two subtokens: capital ##ization. The
## characters are used to indicate this token is a partial token connected to the
token that precedes it. This is also a method to indicate where the spaces are, as it
is assumed tokens without ## in front have a space before them.
• The emoji and Chinese characters are gone and replaced with the [UNK] special
token indicating an “unknown token.”
BERT base model (cased) (2018)
Link to the model on the HuggingFace model hub
Tokenization method: WordPiece
Vocabulary size: 28,996
Special tokens: Same as the uncased version
Tokenized text:
[CLS] English and CA ##PI ##TA ##L ##I ##Z ##AT ##ION [UNK] [UNK] show _ token
##s F ##als ##e None el ##if = = > = else : two ta ##bs : " " Three ta ##bs : " "
12 . 0 * 50 = 600 [SEP]
The cased version of the BERT tokenizer differs mainly in including uppercase
tokens.
• Notice how “CAPITALIZATION” is now represented as eight tokens: CA ##PI
##TA ##L ##I ##Z ##AT ##ION.
48 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
• Both BERT tokenizers wrap the input within a starting [CLS] token and a closing
[SEP] token. [CLS] and [SEP] are utility tokens used to wrap the input text
and they serve their own purposes. [CLS] stands for classification as it’s a token
used at times for sentence classification. [SEP] stands for separator, as it’s used to
separate sentences in some applications that require passing two sentences to a
model (For example, in Chapter 8, we will use a [SEP] token to separate the text
of the query and a candidate result.)
GPT-2 (2019)
Link to the model on the HuggingFace model hub
Tokenization method: Byte pair encoding (BPE), introduced in “Neural machine
translation of rare words with subword units”.
Vocabulary size: 50,257
Special tokens: <|endoftext|>
English and CAP ITAL IZ ATION
           
show _ t ok ens False None el if == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
12 . 0 * 50 = 600
With the GPT-2 tokenizer, we notice the following:
• The newline breaks are represented in the tokenizer.
• Capitalization is preserved, and the word “CAPITALIZATION” is represented in
four tokens.
• The 🎵鸟 characters are now represented by multiple tokens each. While we see
these tokens printed as the   character, they actually stand for different tokens.
For example, the 🎵 emoji is broken down into the tokens with token IDs 8582,
236, and 113. The tokenizer is successful in reconstructing the original character
from these tokens. We can see that by printing tokenizer.decode([8582, 236,
113]), which prints out 🎵.
• The two tabs are represented as two tokens (token number 197 in that vocabu‐
lary) and the four spaces are represented as three tokens (number 220) with the
final space being a part of the token for the closing quote character.
• The two tabs are represented as two tokens (token number 197 in that vocabu‐
lary) and the four spaces are represented as three tokens (number 220) with the
final space being a part of the token for the closing quote character.
LLM Tokenization | 49
What is the significance of whitespace characters? These are
important for models to understand or generate code. A model
that uses a single token to represent four consecutive whitespace
characters is more tuned to a Python code dataset. While a model
can live with representing it as four different tokens, it does make
the modeling more difficult as the model needs to keep track of
the indentation level, which often leads to worse performance. This
is an example of where tokenization choices can help the model
improve on a certain task.
Flan-T5 (2022)
Tokenization method: Flan-T5 uses a tokenizer implementation called SentencePiece,
introduced in “SentencePiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer
and detokenizer for neural text processing”, which supports BPE and the unigram
language model (described in “Subword regularization: Improving neural network
translation models with multiple subword candidates”).
Vocabulary size: 32,100
Special tokens:
• unk_token <unk>
• pad_token <pad>
Tokenized text:
English and CA PI TAL IZ ATION <unk> <unk> show _ to ken s Fal s e None e l if = = >
= else : two tab s : " " Three tab s : " " 12. 0 * 50 = 600 </s>
The Flan-T5 family of models use the SentencePiece method. We notice the
following:
• No newline or whitespace tokens; this would make it challenging for the model
to work with code.
• The emoji and Chinese characters are both replaced by the <unk> token, making
the model completely blind to them.
GPT-4 (2023)
Tokenization method: BPE
Vocabulary size: A little over 100,000
Special tokens:
50 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
• <|endoftext|>
• Fill in the middle tokens. These three tokens enable the LLM to generate a
completion given not only the text before it but also considering the text after
it. This method is explained in more detail in the paper “Efficient training of
language models to fill in the middle”; its exact details are beyond the scope of
this book. These special tokens are:
— <|fim_prefix|>
— <|fim_middle|>
— <|fim_suffix|>
Tokenized text:
English and CAPITAL IZATION
           
show _tokens False None elif == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
12 . 0 * 50 = 600
The GPT-4 tokenizer behaves similarly to its ancestor, the GPT-2 tokenizer. Some
differences are:
• The GPT-4 tokenizer represents the four spaces as a single token. In fact, it has a
specific token for every sequence of whitespaces up to a list of 83 whitespaces.
• The Python keyword elif has its own token in GPT-4. Both this and the previ‐
ous point stem from the model’s focus on code in addition to natural language.
• The GPT-4 tokenizer uses fewer tokens to represent most words. Examples here
include “CAPITALIZATION” (two tokens versus four) and “tokens” (one token
versus three).
• Refer back to what we said about the GPT-2 tokenizer with regards to the Ł
tokens.
StarCoder2 (2024)
StarCoder2 is a 15-billion parameter model focused on generating code described in
the paper “StarCoder 2 and the stack v2: The next generation”, which continues the
work from the original StarCoder described in “StarCoder: May the source be with
you!”.
Tokenization method: Byte pair encoding (BPE)
Vocabulary size: 49,152
Example special tokens:
LLM Tokenization | 51
• <|endoftext|>
• Fill in the middle tokens:
— <fim_prefix>
— <fim_middle>
— <fim_suffix>
— <fim_pad>
• When representing code, managing the context is important. One file might
make a function call to a function that is defined in a different file. So the model
needs some way of being able to identify code that is in different files in the same
code repository, while making a distinction between code in different repos.
That’s why StarCoder2 uses special tokens for the name of the repository and the
filename:
— <filename>
— <reponame>
— <gh_stars>
Tokenized text:
English and CAPITAL IZATION
         
show _ tokens False None elif == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
1 2 . 0 * 5 0 = 6 0 0
This is an encoder that focuses on code generation:
• Similar to GPT-4, it encodes the list of whitespaces as a single token.
• A major difference here to everything we’ve seen so far is that each digit is
assigned its own token (so 600 becomes 6 0 0). The hypothesis here is that this
would lead to better representation of numbers and mathematics. In GPT-2, for
example, the number 870 is represented as a single token. But 871 is represented
as two tokens (8 and 71). You can intuitively see how that might be confusing to
the model and how it represents numbers.
Galactica
The Galactica model described in “Galactica: A large language model for science” is
focused on scientific knowledge and is trained on many scientific papers, reference
materials, and knowledge bases. It pays extra attention to tokenization that makes it
more sensitive to the nuances of the dataset it’s representing. For example, it includes
52 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
special tokens for citations, reasoning, mathematics, amino acid sequences, and DNA
sequences.
Tokenization method: Byte pair encoding (BPE)
Vocabulary size: 50,000
Special tokens:
• <s>
• <pad>
• </s>
• <unk>
• References: Citations are wrapped within the two special tokens:
— [START_REF]
— [END_REF]
— One example of usage from the paper is: Recurrent neural net
works, long short-term memory [START_REF]Long Short-Term Memory,
Hochreiter[END_REF]
• Step-by-step reasoning:
— <work> is an interesting token that the model uses for chain-of-thought rea‐
soning.
Tokenized text:
English and CAP ITAL IZATION
             
show _ tokens False None elif == > = else : two t abs : " " Three t abs : " "
1 2 . 0 * 5 0 = 6 0 0
The Galactica tokenizer behaves similar to StarCoder2 in that it has code in mind. It
also encodes whitespaces in the same way: assigning a single token to sequences of
whitespace of different lengths. It differs in that it also does that for tabs, though. So
from all the tokenizers we’ve seen so far, it’s the only one that assigns a single token to
the string made up of two tabs ('\t\t').
Phi-3 (and Llama 2)
The Phi-3 model we look at in this book reuses the tokenizer of Llama 2 yet adds a
number of special tokens.
LLM Tokenization | 53
Tokenization method: Byte pair encoding (BPE)
Vocabulary size: 32,000
Special tokens:
• <|endoftext|>
• Chat tokens: As chat LLMs rose to popularity in 2023, the conversational nature
of LLMs started to be a leading use case. Tokenizers have been adapted to this
direction by the addition of tokens that indicate the turns in a conversation and
the roles of each speaker. These special tokens include:
— <|user|>
— <|assistant|>
— <|system|>
We can now recap our tour by looking at all these examples side by side:
BERT base
model
(uncased)
[CLS] english and capital ##ization [UNK] [UNK] show _ token ##s false none eli
##f = = > = else : two tab ##s : " " three tab ##s : " " 12 . 0 * 50 = 600 [SEP]
BERT base
model (cased)
[CLS] English and CA ##PI ##TA ##L ##I ##Z ##AT ##ION [UNK] [UNK] show _ token
##s F ##als ##e None el ##if = = > = else : two ta ##bs : " " Three ta ##bs : " " 12 .
0 * 50 = 600 [SEP]
GPT-2 English and CAP ITAL IZ ATION
           
show _ t ok ens False None el if == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
12 . 0 * 50 = 600
FLAN-T5 English and CA PI TAL IZ ATION <unk> <unk> show _ to ken s Fal s e None e l if = = >
= else : two tab s : " " Three tab s : " " 12. 0 * 50 = 600 </s>
GPT-4 English and CAPITAL IZATION
           
show _tokens False None elif == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
12 . 0 * 50 = 600
StarCoder English and CAPITAL IZATION
         
show _ tokens False None elif == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
1 2 . 0 * 5 0 = 6 0 0
54 | Chapter 2: Tokens and Embeddings
Galactica English and CAP ITAL IZATION
             
show _ tokens False None elif == > = else : two t abs : " " Three t abs : " "
1 2 . 0 * 5 0 = 6 0 0
Phi-3 and
Llama 2
<s>
English and C AP IT AL IZ ATION
             
show _ to kens False None elif == >= else : two tabs :" " Three tabs : " "
1 2 . 0 * 5 0 = 6 0 0
Tokenizer Properties
The preceding guided tour of trained tokenizers showed a number of ways in which
actual tokenizers differ from each other. But what determines their tokenization
behavior? There are three major groups of design choices that determine how the
tokenizer will break down text: the tokenization method, the initialization parame‐
ters, and the domain of the data the tokenizer targets.
Tokenization methods
As we’ve seen, there are a number of tokenization methods with byte pair encoding
(BPE) being the more popular one. Each of these methods outlines an algorithm for
how to choose an appropriate set of tokens to represent a dataset. You can find a great
overview of all these methods on the Hugging Face page that summarizes tokenizers.
Tokenizer parameters
After choosing a tokenization method, an LLM designer needs to make some deci‐
sions about the parameters of the tokenizer. These include:
Vocabulary size
How many tokens to keep in the tokenizer’s vocabulary? (30K and 50K are often
used as vocabulary size values, but more and more we’re seeing larger sizes like
100K.)
Special tokens
What special tokens do we want the model to keep track of? We can add as many
of these as we want, especially if we want to build an LLM for special use cases.
Common choices include:
• Beginning of text token (e.g., <s>)
• End of text token
• Padding token
LLM Tokenization | 55
• Unknown token
• CLS token
• Masking token
Aside from these, the LLM designer can add tokens that help better model the
domain of the problem they’re trying to focus on, as we’ve seen with Galactica’s
<work> and [START_REF] tokens.
Capitalization
In languages such as English, how do we want to deal with capitalization?
Should we convert everything to lowercase? (Name capitalization often carries
useful information, but do we want to waste token vocabulary space on all-caps
versions of words?)
The domain of the data
Even if we select the same method and parameters, tokenizer behavior will be differ‐
ent based on the dataset it was trained on (before we even start model training). The
tokenization methods mentioned previously work by optimizing the vocabulary to
represent a specific dataset. From our guided tour we’ve seen how that has an impact
on datasets like code and multilingual text.
For code, for example, we’ve seen that a text-focused tokenizer may tokenize the
indentation spaces like this (we’ll highlight some tokens in color):
def add_numbers(a, b):
...."""Add the two numbers `a` and `b`."""
....return a + b
This may be suboptimal for a code-focused model. Code-focused models are often
improved by making different tokenization choices:
def add_numbers(a, b):
...."""Add the two numbers `a` and `b`."""
....return a + b
These tokenization choices make the model’s job easier and thus its performance has
a higher probability of improving.
You can find a more detailed tutorial on training tokenizers in the Tokenizers section
of the Hugging Face course and in Natural Language Processing with Transformers,
Revised Edition.                 